Document the GitHub (read-only) integration (#773)
Promptless/docs: src/content/docs/docs/reference/integrations/github-read-only.mdx

Reviewer: Note that the read-only integration is also a valid choice to limit scope to repositories that will only ever me read, such as code repositories, when when closed source. The public repository story isn't the only valid one here.

---
title: GitHub (read-only) integration
slug: docs/reference/integrations/github-read-only
type: reference
tags:
  - reference
  - integrations
timestamp: "2026-07-21T00:00:00Z"
sidebar:
  hidden: false
  order: 52.5
---

import { Aside } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

**Used for: Triggers, Context, and Publishing (public repositories)**

Promptless offers two ways to install its GitHub App: the standard [GitHub App](/docs/reference/integrations/github), which has read and write access, and the read-only app. The read-only app exists for teams that cannot grant a third-party or AI app write access to their repositories.

## When to use the read-only app

> Many teams — especially open-source maintainer groups — do not approve any third-party or AI application that has write access to their repositories; for them, granting write access is a non-starter. The read-only app lets those teams use Promptless without granting write access: Promptless receives webhooks and read access, and publishes documentation through a fork instead of writing to the repository directly. This fork-based publishing works only for public repositories — see the [caution below](#public-repositories-only).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some teams, especially open-source maintainer groups, can't approve a third-party or AI application that has write access to their repositories. The read-only app lets those teams use Promptless without granting write access: Promptless receives webhooks and read access, and publishes documentation through a fork instead of writing to the repository directly. This fork-based publishing works only for [public repositories](#public-repositories-only).
```

| How documentation PRs are published | Promptless creates a branch and opens a pull request directly on your repository | Promptless opens a pull request from its own fork into your repository's upstream base branch |
| Repository support for publishing   | Public and private repositories                                                  | Public repositories only                                                                      |

## How publishing works

Because the read-only app has no write permission, Promptless cannot push branches or open pull requests directly on your repository. Instead, Promptless creates its own fork of the repository, makes its documentation branches on that fork, and opens a pull request from the fork into your repository's upstream base branch. A service account posts comments and performs the other actions that the write-enabled app would otherwise handle.

The fork is set up when you configure a doc collection on a read-only integration.

> ## Public repositories only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Promptless determines the platform from the integration that reaches the repository, so a doc collection on a repo reached by the read-only app uses the read-only (`github_oss`) publishing flow automatically — you do not set this by hand.

## What you can do with the read-only app

Once connected, you can use the read-only app for:

- **[Triggers](/docs/connect/triggers)**: Monitor pull requests and commits for documentation updates
- **[Context Sources](/docs/connect/context-sources)**: Search code repositories and issues for technical context
- **[Doc Collections](/docs/connect/doc-locations/github-repos)**: Publish documentation updates to public repositories through a pull request from a fork

[Updating Contributor PRs](/docs/start-here/open-source-quickstart) (adding a docs commit to a contributor's existing PR) is not compatible with the read-only app.

## Example

> A public open-source project whose maintainers will not grant write access to any external app — a project like Helm, for instance — installs the read-only app, connects its source and docs repositories, and configures a doc collection for its docs. When a contributor's pull request merges, Promptless drafts the doc update, pushes the branch to its fork of the repository, and opens a pull request from that fork into the project's upstream base branch; the service account posts the linking comment. Maintainers review and merge the documentation PR like any other community contribution — without Promptless ever holding write access to the repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A public open-source project whose maintainers will not grant write access to any external app installs the read-only app, connects its source and docs repositories, and configures a doc collection for its docs. When a contributor's pull request merges, Promptless drafts the doc update, pushes the branch to its fork of the repository, and opens a pull request from that fork into the project's upstream base branch; the service account posts the linking comment. Maintainers review and merge the documentation PR like any other community contribution without Promptless ever holding write access to the repository.
```

| How documentation PRs are published | Promptless creates a branch and opens a pull request directly on your repository | Promptless opens a pull request from its own fork into your repository's upstream base branch |
| Repository support for publishing   | Public and private repositories                                                  | Public repositories only                                                                      |

## How publishing works

Because the read-only app has no write permission, Promptless cannot push branches or open pull requests directly on your repository. Instead, Promptless creates its own fork of the repository in a GitHub organization Promptless owns, makes its documentation branches on that fork, and opens a pull request from the fork into your repository's upstream base branch. A shared Promptless service account holds the credential that performs every write in this flow. That includes creating the fork, pushing the documentation branch, opening the pull request, and posting the linking comment.

> Promptless creates the fork itself as needed. Configuring a doc collection therefore does not create the fork, so don't expect to see a fork in Promptless's organization immediately after setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Promptless creates the fork itself as needed. Configuring a doc collection does not create the fork, so don't expect to see a fork in Promptless's organization immediately after setup.
```

> Promptless creates the fork itself; you never create it. Fork creation happens on demand: Promptless makes the fork the first time it needs to work in the repository — when it opens the documentation workspace to draft a change, or when it publishes. Configuring a doc collection therefore does not create the fork, so don't expect to see a fork in Promptless's organization immediately after setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Promptless creates the fork itself as needed. Configuring a doc collection therefore does not create the fork, so don't expect to see a fork in Promptless's organization immediately after setup.
```

<Aside type="caution">

>   The fork-to-upstream publishing flow works only for public repositories. The shared service account that creates the fork has no access to a private customer repository, so there's nothing to fork.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The fork-to-upstream publishing flow works only for public repositories. Promptless can't fork private repositories.
```

>   Nothing checks repository visibility when you install the app or configure a doc collection, so nothing stops you from pointing the read-only app at a private docs repository — it fails later, when Promptless tries to create the fork, leaving Promptless with neither write access nor a fork to publish through. Private repositories must use the [standard GitHub App](/docs/reference/integrations/github). Triggers and context can still work against a private repo with read access, but publishing cannot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

</Aside>

## Installation

Install the read-only app from the [integrations page](https://app.gopromptless.ai/integrations), then grant it access to the repositories you want Promptless to work with. For open-source publishing, this includes the public repository whose docs you want to keep current.

Once connected, the read-only integration appears on the integrations page as its own **GitHub (read-only)** card. The **Configure in GitHub** button on that card opens the app's installation page, where you can adjust which repositories Promptless can access. Repository access is always governed in GitHub's own App settings.

> `platform` is a field you set on each [doc collection](/docs/reference/configuration-reference#doc-collections) in `promptless.yaml`. Setting `platform: github_oss` selects the read-only publishing flow and pins that doc collection to the read-only integration. In the dashboard's Form mode, Promptless prefills `platform` from the connected integration, so most readers never type it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`platform` is a field you set on each [doc collection](/docs/reference/configuration-reference#doc-collections) in `promptless.yaml`. Setting `platform: github_oss` selects the read-only publishing flow and pins that doc collection to the read-only integration. In the dashboard's Form mode, Promptless prefills `platform` from the connected integration, so most readers never see it.
```

- **[Context Sources](/docs/connect/context-sources)**: Search code repositories and issues for technical context
- **[Doc Collections](/docs/connect/doc-locations/github-repos)**: Publish documentation updates to public repositories through a pull request from a fork

[Updating Contributor PRs](/docs/start-here/open-source-quickstart) (adding a docs commit to a contributor's existing PR) is not compatible with the read-only app.

## Example

A public open-source project whose maintainers will not grant write access to any external app installs the read-only app, connects its source and docs repositories, and configures a doc collection for its docs. When a contributor's pull request merges, Promptless drafts the doc update, pushes the branch to its fork of the repository, and opens a pull request from that fork into the project's upstream base branch; the service account posts the linking comment. Maintainers review and merge the documentation PR like any other community contribution without Promptless ever holding write access to the repository.

## Frequently asked questions

<details>
  <summary>Can I use the read-only app with a private repository?</summary>

>   No. Publishing requires a fork in Promptless's own GitHub organization, and the shared service account that creates it cannot reach a private repository to fork it. Nothing catches this at setup; the attempt fails when Promptless tries to create the fork. Private docs repositories must use the [standard GitHub App](/docs/reference/integrations/github), which has write access. Triggers and context can still read a private repo, but Promptless cannot publish documentation to one through the read-only app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Yes. The read-only can read triggers and context from a private repo, but Promptless cannot publish documentation to one through the read-only app. Doc collections in private repositories must use the [standard GitHub App](/docs/reference/integrations/github).
```

</details>

<details>
  <summary>When is the fork created?</summary>

  The first time Promptless needs to work in the repository — when it opens the documentation workspace to draft a change, or when it publishes — not when you configure the doc collection. Promptless creates the fork without you doing anything.
</details>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

<details>
  <summary>Why not just use the standard GitHub App?</summary>

  Some teams — especially open-source maintainer groups — cannot approve any application with write access to their repositories. The read-only app is the path for them: Promptless never takes write access and instead publishes from a fork.
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Can I use the standard app and the read-only app in the same organization?</summary>

>   Yes. You set `platform` per doc collection, so one collection can use `github` while another uses `github_oss` in the same GitHub organization. Each collection's platform pins it to the matching integration, so you can install the standard GitHub App on some repositories and the read-only app on others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Yes. You can install the standard GitHub App on some repositories and the read-only app on others.
```
